README.md, before:

# Find Bad Motion Tracks

This is a [Blender](https://blender.org)
[addon](https://docs.blender.org/manual/en/latest/editors/preferences/addons.html)
for finding bad [motion tracking
tracks](https://docs.blender.org/manual/en/latest/movie_clip/tracking/clip/editing/track.html).

The way it works is that it highlights tracks that move differently from the
others.

Basically, if all tracks move to the right, except one that moves to the left,
then the single track moving to the left is likely wrong and should be evaluated
by a human.

## Installation Instructions

1. Go to the [latest release download page](https://github.com/walles/find_bad_motion_tracks/releases/latest)
1. Download the `find_bad_tracks-A_B_C.py` file
1. In Blender, open Preferences (under the <kbd>Edit</kbd> menu)
1. Click <kbd>Add-ons</kbd>
1. Click the <kbd>Install...</kbd> button
1. Find the file you just downloaded and click <kbd>Install Add-on</kbd>
1. Check the box next to <kbd>Video Tools: Find Bad Tracks</kbd>

## Usage Instructions

1. Follow the Installation Instructions `^` for how to install and enable this addon

1. Do some motion tracking, collect some tracks

1. In the Motion Tracking workspace, Movie Clip Editor on the middle left of
   your screen, select the <kbd>Track</kbd> tab, expand <kbd>Find Bad
   Tracks</kbd> (you may have to scroll down to see this section) and press the
   <kbd>Find Bad Tracks</kbd> button.

   At about 400 tracks and 600 frames the computation takes 5s-10s on my
   machine.

1. A list of Bad Tracks will now be displayed just below that button, with each
   track's badness score next to it.

   Clicking a track in the list will select that track in the clip editor and
   take you to the worst frame. Stepping a few frames left or right will show
   how the track skips / slides.

1. Another list of Duplicate Tracks comes below the Bad Tracks list. This list
   contains track pairs that come close at some point of their lifetimes. The
   most divergent track pairs are at the top of this list.

   At the bottom of the list you will find tracks that overlap tightly without
   diverging.

   Clicking a track pair in this list will take you to a frame where the tracks
   overlap. Stepping a few frames left or right will show you if the tracks
   start diverging. If they do, (at least) one of the tracks are likely bad!

![Example usage](example.png 'Example usage')

# Comparison to Built-in Functionality

Find Bad Tracks is similar to the built-in [Filter
Tracks](https://docs.blender.org/manual/en/latest/movie_clip/tracking/clip/editing/track.html#filter-tracks)
functionality ([source](https://github.com/blender/blender/blob/04c75c5ce7699a1502a7c2212d4aa57166465514/release/scripts/startup/bl_operators/clip.py#L141-L215)).

<!-- Table generated by https://www.tablesgenerator.com/markdown_tables -->

|                        | Find Bad Tracks                                                                                                                          | Filter Tracks                                                                                                                   |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Finding the midpoint   | :green_heart: Uses median, resilient to outliers                                                                                         | :broken_heart: Uses average, sensitive to outliers                                                                              |
| Threshold              | :green_heart: N/A, calculates a badness value based on the 80th percentile of track movements, works on both fast and slow moving frames | :broken_heart: 5 pixels, too sensitive on fast moving frames, too lenient on slow moving frames                                 |
| Uses derivative        | :green_heart:                                                                                                                            | :green_heart:                                                                                                                   |
| Uses 2nd derivative    | :green_heart:                                                                                                                            | :broken_heart: No, which means the Filtering will miss tracks which suddenly move in a new direction                            |
| Presentation           | :green_heart: List tracks ranked by badness, lets user filter                                                                            | :broken_heart: Just selects all "bad" tracks, in my case that included lots of good tracks making the signal-to-noise ratio bad |
| Finds duplicate tracks | :green_heart:                                                                                                                            | :broken_heart:                                                                                                                  |

## Development

Use [`tox`](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/install.html) to verify your code before
committing / PRing:

```
tox
```

I have developed this with:

- [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) with its [Blender Development
  extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=JacquesLucke.blender-development)
- The [Fake Blender Python API module collection](https://github.com/nutti/fake-bpy-module) in a virtualenv
- Blender 2.93.1

## Making a New Release

1. Make sure the screenshot and description ^ are both up to date and in sync.
1. Run `release.sh` and follow instructions.

## TODO

- Fix the tracks list tooltips, the current ones make no sense: "Active Bad
  Track / Double click to rename."
- Profile and see what can easily be sped up
- Publish on Blender Market

### DONE

- Document a release process
- Make an initial release
- Document install instructions higher up in this document
- Ignore locked tracks, assuming they have been manually vetted by a human
- Announce on BlenderNation
- Fix user reported issues
- Add duplicate tracks detection
- Remove worst-frame column from the bad-tracks list.
- Properly deselect unrelated tracks when switching between duplicate track
  pairs in the UI
- Add a `tox.ini` with `mypy`, `pylint` and `black` code formatting. Black
  formats locally and verifies in CI.
- Add a `tox` Github action for PRs and pushes

Commit message:

Notes about a potentially better algorithm

README.md, after:

# Find Bad Motion Tracks

This is a [Blender](https://blender.org)
[addon](https://docs.blender.org/manual/en/latest/editors/preferences/addons.html)
for finding bad [motion tracking
tracks](https://docs.blender.org/manual/en/latest/movie_clip/tracking/clip/editing/track.html).

The way it works is that it highlights tracks that move differently from the
others.

Basically, if all tracks move to the right, except one that moves to the left,
then the single track moving to the left is likely wrong and should be evaluated
by a human.

## Installation Instructions

1. Go to the [latest release download page](https://github.com/walles/find_bad_motion_tracks/releases/latest)
1. Download the `find_bad_tracks-A_B_C.py` file
1. In Blender, open Preferences (under the <kbd>Edit</kbd> menu)
1. Click <kbd>Add-ons</kbd>
1. Click the <kbd>Install...</kbd> button
1. Find the file you just downloaded and click <kbd>Install Add-on</kbd>
1. Check the box next to <kbd>Video Tools: Find Bad Tracks</kbd>

## Usage Instructions

1. Follow the Installation Instructions `^` for how to install and enable this addon

1. Do some motion tracking, collect some tracks

1. In the Motion Tracking workspace, Movie Clip Editor on the middle left of
   your screen, select the <kbd>Track</kbd> tab, expand <kbd>Find Bad
   Tracks</kbd> (you may have to scroll down to see this section) and press the
   <kbd>Find Bad Tracks</kbd> button.

   At about 400 tracks and 600 frames the computation takes 5s-10s on my
   machine.

1. A list of Bad Tracks will now be displayed just below that button, with each
   track's badness score next to it.

   Clicking a track in the list will select that track in the clip editor and
   take you to the worst frame. Stepping a few frames left or right will show
   how the track skips / slides.

1. Another list of Duplicate Tracks comes below the Bad Tracks list. This list
   contains track pairs that come close at some point of their lifetimes. The
   most divergent track pairs are at the top of this list.

   At the bottom of the list you will find tracks that overlap tightly without
   diverging.

   Clicking a track pair in this list will take you to a frame where the tracks
   overlap. Stepping a few frames left or right will show you if the tracks
   start diverging. If they do, (at least) one of the tracks are likely bad!

![Example usage](example.png 'Example usage')

# Comparison to Built-in Functionality

Find Bad Tracks is similar to the built-in [Filter
Tracks](https://docs.blender.org/manual/en/latest/movie_clip/tracking/clip/editing/track.html#filter-tracks)
functionality ([source](https://github.com/blender/blender/blob/04c75c5ce7699a1502a7c2212d4aa57166465514/release/scripts/startup/bl_operators/clip.py#L141-L215)).

<!-- Table generated by https://www.tablesgenerator.com/markdown_tables -->

|                        | Find Bad Tracks                                                                                                                          | Filter Tracks                                                                                                                   |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Finding the midpoint   | :green_heart: Uses median, resilient to outliers                                                                                         | :broken_heart: Uses average, sensitive to outliers                                                                              |
| Threshold              | :green_heart: N/A, calculates a badness value based on the 80th percentile of track movements, works on both fast and slow moving frames | :broken_heart: 5 pixels, too sensitive on fast moving frames, too lenient on slow moving frames                                 |
| Uses derivative        | :green_heart:                                                                                                                            | :green_heart:                                                                                                                   |
| Uses 2nd derivative    | :green_heart:                                                                                                                            | :broken_heart: No, which means the Filtering will miss tracks which suddenly move in a new direction                            |
| Presentation           | :green_heart: List tracks ranked by badness, lets user filter                                                                            | :broken_heart: Just selects all "bad" tracks, in my case that included lots of good tracks making the signal-to-noise ratio bad |
| Finds duplicate tracks | :green_heart:                                                                                                                            | :broken_heart:                                                                                                                  |

## Development

Use [`tox`](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/install.html) to verify your code before
committing / PRing:

```
tox
```

I have developed this with:

- [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) with its [Blender Development
  extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=JacquesLucke.blender-development)
- The [Fake Blender Python API module collection](https://github.com/nutti/fake-bpy-module) in a virtualenv
- Blender 2.93.1

## Making a New Release

1. Make sure the screenshot and description ^ are both up to date and in sync.
1. Run `release.sh` and follow instructions.

## TODO

- Fix the tracks list tooltips, the current ones make no sense: "Active Bad
  Track / Double click to rename."
- Profile and see what can easily be sped up
- Publish on Blender Market

## Next Gen

The current badness algorithm works well when all tracks move in the same
direction (camera pans).

But doesn't work at all when the camera zooms or rotates.

What about this then?

1. Compute the (2D) transformation matrix between two frames
1. For each marker, check how far it is from its computed value given that
   matrix

That should work for zooming and rotating camera motion as well. Also, we could
check the whole matrix and see if it makes sense, if the whole image just gets
narrower for example that's probably wrong.

Inspirational code here: <https://stackoverflow.com/a/20555267/473672>

### DONE

- Document a release process
- Make an initial release
- Document install instructions higher up in this document
- Ignore locked tracks, assuming they have been manually vetted by a human
- Announce on BlenderNation
- Fix user reported issues
- Add duplicate tracks detection
- Remove worst-frame column from the bad-tracks list.
- Properly deselect unrelated tracks when switching between duplicate track
  pairs in the UI
- Add a `tox.ini` with `mypy`, `pylint` and `black` code formatting. Black
  formats locally and verifies in CI.
- Add a `tox` Github action for PRs and pushes
